Add Jack to authors, new blog post. (#4960)
Azure/AKS: blog/_posts/2025-04-22-vm-generations-and-aks.md

---

> title: "VM Generations and AKS"

Reviewer: Might want the title to be "Azure VM Generations and AKS"

> title: "VM Generations and AKS"

Author: ```suggestion
title: "Azure VM Generations and AKS"
```

description: "Learn more about Generation 1 and Generation 2 VMs and what they offer, differences between them, upcoming Generation 1 VM retirements, and how to move your AKS workloads to Generation 2 VMs."
date: 2025-04-22 # date is important. future dates will not be published

> authors: 

Reviewer: We do support multiple authors if you want to add Ally or others. We've tested up to 2 authors and here is an example. https://github.com/Azure/AKS/blob/master/blog/_posts/2025-04-11-infiniband-on-aks.md

Author: Ohh, nice! I'll include Sarah and Ally, then!

>    - Jack Jiang

Author: ```suggestion
   - Jack Jiang
   - Ally Ford
   - Sarah Zhou
```

categories: 
- operations
---

> *This blog was co-authored by Ally Ford, Product Manager 2, AKS, Sarah Zhou, Product Manager, Azure Compute, and Jack Jiang, Product Manager, AKS*

Author: ```suggestion
```

## What are Virtual Machine Generations?

> 

Reviewer: Might be nice to start this off with an intro sentence like "Did you know there are multiple generations of Azure VM's?" or something similar. I think it might help to set the context right at the start of the post

> 

Author: ```suggestion

If you are a user of Azure, you may be familiar with virtual machines. What you may not have known is the fact that Azure now offers two generations of virtual machines! 

```

> Azure virtual machine sizes are broken down by the amount/type of resources allocated to the virtual machine in the cloud. These resources are in turn 

Author: ```suggestion
Before going further, let's first breakdown virtual machines. Azure virtual machine are offered in various "sizes," which are in turn broken down by the amount/type of resources allocated to the virtual machine in the cloud. These resources are
```

If you are a user of Azure, you may be familiar with virtual machines. What you may not have known is the fact that Azure now offers two generations of virtual machines! 

> Before going further, let's first breakdown virtual machines. Azure virtual machine are offered in various "sizes," which are in turn broken down by the amount/type of resources allocated to the virtual machine in the cloud. These resources are

Author: ```suggestion
Before going further, let's first breakdown virtual machines. Azure virtual machines are offered in various "sizes," which are in turn broken down by the amount/type of resources allocated to the virtual machine in the cloud. These resources are
```

Azure VM sizes (v5 and older) have largely supported both Generation 1 and Generation 2 VMs. [This page](https://learn.microsoft.com/azure/virtual-machines/generation-2)
gives a thorough breakdown on VM series and the generation they support. 

The latest v6 VMs (whether they are 
[Intel](https://techcommunity.microsoft.com/blog/azurecompute/announcing-preview-of-new-azure-dlsv6-dsv6-esv6-vms-with-new-cpu-azure-boost-and/4192124), 
[AMD](https://techcommunity.microsoft.com/blog/azurecompute/new-daeafav6-vms-with-increased-performance-and-azure-boost-are-now-generally-av/4309381), or 
[ARM](https://azure.microsoft.com/blog/azure-cobalt-100-based-virtual-machines-are-now-generally-available/?msockid=150f515112e461e5201d45b1136e602c)
will exclusively support Generation 2 VMs.

### Comparing Generation 1 & Generation 2
Generation 2 VMs offer exclusive features over Generation 1 VMs, such as increased memory, improved CPU performance, support for NVMe disks, and support for Trusted 
Launch. With some [exceptions](https://learn.microsoft.com/windows-server/virtualization/hyper-v/plan/should-i-create-a-generation-1-or-2-virtual-machine-in-hyper-v),

> it is generally recommended to migrate to Generation 2 VMs to take advantage of the newest features and functionalities in Azure VMs.

Reviewer 2: do we need a doc on how to do this on AKS? 

The user doesn't really have control over this but they don't really need it to migrate they just need

a) to know they are in gen 1 (we need to show them how to check)
b) to know how to migrate, eg. deploy a nodepool with a Gen2 supported SKU, and we should use Gen2 on those cases (I think windows was the last exception, right @allyford ?)

- When creating Windows Server 2025 node pools on AKS, the default will be a Generation 2 VM unless the VM size does not support it.  
- When creating Windows Server 2019 and Windows Server 2022 node pools on AKS, the default will be Generation 1 VM unless the VM size does not support it. To use a Generation 2 VM, you must add `--aks-custom-headers UseWindowsGen2VM=true` during node pool creation. 

For more information on Generation 2 default behavior on AKS, see [AKS documentation](https://learn.microsoft.com/azure/aks/generation-2-vm).

For a list of supported VM sizes for Generation 1 and Generation 2, please refer to the table on [this page](https://learn.microsoft.com/azure/virtual-machines/generation-2#generation-2-vm-sizes).

### Generation 1 VM Retirements
When a VM size or series reaches its retirement date, the VM will be deallocated. VM deallocation means that your AKS node pool may experience breakage.

If you would like to confirm whether your Generation 1 VM sizes are retired or are being retired, please search in the [Azure Updates](https://azure.microsoft.com/updates) 
page.

## Migrating From Retired VM Sizes

> If you are using a VM size that is retiring/retired, to prevent any potential disruption to your service, it is recommended to either delete or resize the affected VM node pools.

Reviewer 2: You can't change the SKU on a nodepool today

Author: Noted. Will reword to having the customer needing to spin up another nodepool.

> If you are using a VM size that is retiring/retired, to prevent any potential disruption to your service, it is recommended to either delete or resize the affected VM node pools.

Author: ```suggestion
If you are using a VM size that is retiring/retired, to prevent any potential disruption to your service, it is recommended to resize your node pool(s) to a supported VM size.
```

## Migrating From Retired VM Sizes

> If you are using a VM size that is retiring/retired, to prevent any potential disruption to your service, it is recommended to resize your node pool(s) to a supported VM size.

Author: ```suggestion
If you are using a VM size that is retiring/retired, to prevent any potential disruption to your service, it is recommended to resize your node pool(s) to a supported VM size. AKS does not currently support transitioning to a new VM size within the same node pool, so a new node pool will be created and workloads moved to it during the resizing process. 
```

> To determine the size your nodes, navigate to the Azure Portal, access your Resource Group, and then select your AKS resource. Within the "Overview" tab, you will find the size of your node pool.

Author: ```suggestion
To determine the size of your nodes, navigate to the Azure Portal, access your Resource Group, and then select your AKS resource. Within the "Overview" tab, you will find the size of your node pool.
```

Alternatively, you may run this command in the Azure CLI. Make sure you fill in the names of your resource group and cluster name: 
```azurecli-interactive
az aks nodepool list \
--resource-group <yourResourceGroupName> \ 
--cluster-name <yourAKSClusterName> \ 
--query "[].{Name:name, VMSize:vmSize}" \ 
--output table 
```

> ### Resizing or deleting your node pools

Author: ```suggestion
### Resizing your node pools
```

> After you determine the appropriate nodepool(s) to take action on, you have the option to either [**delete**](https://learn.microsoft.com/azure/aks/delete-node-pool?tabs=azure-cli) 

Author: ```suggestion
After you determine the appropriate nodepool(s) to take action on, you can [**resize**](https://learn.microsoft.com/azure/aks/resize-node-pool?tabs=azure-cli) your nodepool(s) to a supported VM size.
```

> or [**resize**](https://learn.microsoft.com/azure/aks/resize-node-pool?tabs=azure-cli) your nodepool(s).

Reviewer 2: resize and delete are the same thing, delete and create a new one. 

there's no option to change the sku of an existing nodepool so we probably shouldn't share 2 docs, not sure why I'd just delete a nodepool and not create another one :)

Author: Was thinking to address very edge case where a customer might just think "I didn't need to VM much anyways, if it's retiring I might as well just get rid of it". 

Though noted on your point, the resizing page actually directly mentions how to get rid of a node pool. I'll reword this section to focus on resizing and call out specifically that SKUs are set per nodepool (so they'd need a new NP).

> or [**resize**](https://learn.microsoft.com/azure/aks/resize-node-pool?tabs=azure-cli) your nodepool(s).

Author: ```suggestion
```

> If you choose to [**delete**](https://learn.microsoft.com/azure/aks/delete-node-pool?tabs=azure-cli) a node pool, the virtual machine scale set (VMSS) and the VMs for 

Reviewer 2: What about VM Pools?

Author: VM pools as in VM node pools (https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/aks/virtual-machines-node-pools)? 

Since feature itself is in preview, didn't consider it in this blog to avoid confusion; resize/delete actions would be by node pool. Would some callout to VM pools be useful here?

Reviewer 2: Fair, assuming that we don't have any gen 1 in VM pools :)

we could also just state that, that VM pools are all gen2

Author: Aligned! I'll throw in a quick note to state this 😄

> If you choose to [**delete**](https://learn.microsoft.com/azure/aks/delete-node-pool?tabs=azure-cli) a node pool, the virtual machine scale set (VMSS) and the VMs for 

Author: ```suggestion
```

> each node in the nodepool is deleted. Any running node instances and pods in the pool are also deleted. 

Author: ```suggestion
```

> If you choose to [**resize**](https://learn.microsoft.com/azure/aks/resize-node-pool?tabs=azure-cli) a node pool, you'll go through the process of creating a new node 

Author: ```suggestion
When [**resizing**](https://learn.microsoft.com/azure/aks/resize-node-pool?tabs=azure-cli) a node pool, you'll go through the process of creating a new node
```

pool with your desired VM size while the existing node pool is cordoned, drained, and ultimately removed.

Depending on the needs of your infrastructure and workloads, when resizing your node pool, please make sure that you pick a new VM size that will best suit your needs.

> 

Author: ```suggestion
Note that these instructions are in reference to node pools. If you are using [Virtual Machines node pools](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/aks/virtual-machines-node-pools), VMs should all be generation 2 by default.
```

> Note that these instructions are in reference to node pools. If you are using [Virtual Machines node pools](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/aks/virtual-machines-node-pools), VMs should all be generation 2 by default.

Author: ```suggestion

Note that these instructions are in reference to node pools. If you are using [Virtual Machines node pools](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/aks/virtual-machines-node-pools), VMs should all be generation 2 by default.
```

---
title: "Azure VM Generations and AKS"
description: "Learn more about Generation 1 and Generation 2 VMs and what they offer, differences between them, upcoming Generation 1 VM retirements, and how to move your AKS workloads to Generation 2 VMs."
date: 2025-04-22 # date is important. future dates will not be published
authors: 
   - Jack Jiang
   - Ally Ford
   - Sarah Zhou
categories: 
- operations
---
## What are Virtual Machine Generations?

If you are a user of Azure, you may be familiar with virtual machines. What you may not have known is the fact that Azure now offers two generations of virtual machines! 

> Before going further, let's first breakdown virtual machines. Azure virtual machines are offered in various "sizes," which are in turn broken down by the amount/type of resources allocated to the virtual machine in the cloud. These resources are

Reviewer 3: Azure virtual machines are offered in various "sizes," which are broken down by the amount and type of each resource allocated, such as CPU, memory, storage, and network bandwidth.

> Before going further, let's first breakdown virtual machines. Azure virtual machines are offered in various "sizes," which are in turn broken down by the amount/type of resources allocated to the virtual machine in the cloud. These resources are

Author: ```suggestion
Before going further, let's first breakdown virtual machines. Azure virtual machines are offered in various "sizes," which are broken down by the amount and type of each resource allocated, such as CPU, memory, storage, and network bandwidth. These resources are
```

> tied to a portion of a physical server's hardware capabilities. A single physical server may be broken down into a collection of *size series*, or 

Reviewer 3: Physical servers may be broken down into many different VM *size series* or...

> tied to a portion of a physical server's hardware capabilities. A single physical server may be broken down into a collection of *size series*, or 

Author: ```suggestion
tied to a portion of a physical server's hardware capabilities. Physical servers may be broken down into many different VM *size series* or
```

configurations available utilizing its resources. 

> As the physical hardware ages and newer components become available, older hardware of a previous generation get retired, while newer generation hardware 

Reviewer 3: older hardware and VMs get retired, while newer generation hardware and VM products are made available.

is progressively made available. 

> In this blog, we will go over Generation 1 and the newer Generation 2 virtual machines. Both have their own use cases, and [picking the right one](https://learn.microsoft.com/windows-server/virtualization/hyper-v/plan/should-i-create-a-generation-1-or-2-virtual-machine-in-hyper-v) 

Reviewer 3: remove "the" before Generation 2

> In this blog, we will go over Generation 1 and the newer Generation 2 virtual machines. Both have their own use cases, and [picking the right one](https://learn.microsoft.com/windows-server/virtualization/hyper-v/plan/should-i-create-a-generation-1-or-2-virtual-machine-in-hyper-v) 

Author: ```suggestion
In this blog, we will go over Generation 1 and newer Generation 2 virtual machines. Both have their own use cases, and [picking the right one](https://learn.microsoft.com/windows-server/virtualization/hyper-v/plan/should-i-create-a-generation-1-or-2-virtual-machine-in-hyper-v) 
```

to suit your workloads is critical in ensuring you get the best possible experience, capabilities, and cost.  

### Virtual Machine Generation Overview

Azure VM sizes (v5 and older) have largely supported both Generation 1 and Generation 2 VMs. [This page](https://learn.microsoft.com/azure/virtual-machines/generation-2)
gives a thorough breakdown on VM series and the generation they support. 

The latest v6 VMs (whether they are 

> [Intel](https://techcommunity.microsoft.com/blog/azurecompute/announcing-preview-of-new-azure-dlsv6-dsv6-esv6-vms-with-new-cpu-azure-boost-and/4192124), 

Reviewer 3: https://techcommunity.microsoft.com/blog/azurecompute/announcing-general-availability-of-azure-dlde-v6-vms-powered-by-intel-emr-proces/4376186

New GA link

> [Intel](https://techcommunity.microsoft.com/blog/azurecompute/announcing-preview-of-new-azure-dlsv6-dsv6-esv6-vms-with-new-cpu-azure-boost-and/4192124), 

Author: ```suggestion
[Intel](https://techcommunity.microsoft.com/blog/azurecompute/announcing-general-availability-of-azure-dlde-v6-vms-powered-by-intel-emr-proces/4376186), 
```

[AMD](https://techcommunity.microsoft.com/blog/azurecompute/new-daeafav6-vms-with-increased-performance-and-azure-boost-are-now-generally-av/4309381), or 
[ARM](https://azure.microsoft.com/blog/azure-cobalt-100-based-virtual-machines-are-now-generally-available/?msockid=150f515112e461e5201d45b1136e602c)
will exclusively support Generation 2 VMs.

### Comparing Generation 1 & Generation 2
Generation 2 VMs offer exclusive features over Generation 1 VMs, such as increased memory, improved CPU performance, support for NVMe disks, and support for Trusted 
Launch. With some [exceptions](https://learn.microsoft.com/windows-server/virtualization/hyper-v/plan/should-i-create-a-generation-1-or-2-virtual-machine-in-hyper-v),
it is generally recommended to migrate to Generation 2 VMs to take advantage of the newest features and functionalities in Azure VMs.

The table below summarizes some key differences between Generation 1 and Generation 2 VMs. For a more detailed comparison, please refer to this [page](https://learn.microsoft.com/previous-versions/windows/it-pro/windows-server-2012-R2-and-2012/dn282285(v=ws.11)).

> | **Topic** | **Generate 2 VM** | **Generation 1 VM** |

Author: ```suggestion
| **Feature** | **Generation 2 VM** | **Generation 1 VM** |
```

| --- | --- | --- |
| Firmware Interface | UEFI (Unified Extensible Firmware Interface)-based boot ([Additional security features and faster boot times](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/windows-hardware/design/device-experiences/oem-uefi#uefi-benefits)) | BIOS (Basic Input/Output System)-based boot (Legacy) |

> | Latest v6 VM Support | [v6 VMs](https://techcommunity.microsoft.com/discussions/compute/boosting-performance-with-the-latest-generations-of-virtual-machines-in-azure/4381896) support Generation 2 VMs | v6 VMs do **NOT** support Generation 1 VMs |

Reviewer 3: Remove this link, only includes Intel v6. There is no page with all v6 VMs including Intel/AMD/Arm

> | Latest v6 VM Support | [v6 VMs](https://techcommunity.microsoft.com/discussions/compute/boosting-performance-with-the-latest-generations-of-virtual-machines-in-azure/4381896) support Generation 2 VMs | v6 VMs do **NOT** support Generation 1 VMs |

Author: ```suggestion
| Latest v6 VM Support | v6 VMs support Generation 2 VMs | v6 VMs do **NOT** support Generation 1 VMs |
```

> | [Trusted Launch](https://learn.microsoft.com/azure/virtual-machines/trusted-launch) | Can enable Trusted Launch, which includes protections like virtual Trusted Platform Module (vTPM) | Can **NOT** enable Trusted Launch |

Reviewer 3: can we move link to the Trusted Launch in second column

> | [Trusted Launch](https://learn.microsoft.com/azure/virtual-machines/trusted-launch) | Can enable Trusted Launch, which includes protections like virtual Trusted Platform Module (vTPM) | Can **NOT** enable Trusted Launch |

Author: ```suggestion
| Trusted Launch | Can enable [Trusted Launch](https://learn.microsoft.com/azure/virtual-machines/trusted-launch), which includes protections like virtual Trusted Platform Module (vTPM) | Can **NOT** enable Trusted Launch |
```

> | [NVMe Interface Support](https://learn.microsoft.com/azure/virtual-machines/nvme-overview) | Supports NVMe disks, which requires NVM-enabled Generation 2 image | Does **NOT** support NVMe disks |

Reviewer 3: can we move link to "NVMe disks" in second column

> | [NVMe Interface Support](https://learn.microsoft.com/azure/virtual-machines/nvme-overview) | Supports NVMe disks, which requires NVM-enabled Generation 2 image | Does **NOT** support NVMe disks |

Author: ```suggestion
| NVMe Interface Support | Supports [NVMe disks](https://learn.microsoft.com/azure/virtual-machines/nvme-overview), which requires NVM-enabled Generation 2 image | Does **NOT** support NVMe disks |
```

If you would like to confirm whether your Generation 1 VM sizes are retired or are being retired, please search in the [Azure Updates](https://azure.microsoft.com/updates) 
page.

## Migrating From Retired VM Sizes

If you are using a VM size that is retiring/retired, to prevent any potential disruption to your service, it is recommended to resize your node pool(s) to a supported VM size. AKS does not currently support transitioning to a new VM size within the same node pool, so a new node pool will be created and workloads moved to it during the resizing process. 

### What VM sizes are my nodes?
To determine the size of your nodes, navigate to the Azure Portal, access your Resource Group, and then select your AKS resource. Within the "Overview" tab, you will find the size of your node pool.

Alternatively, you may run this command in the Azure CLI. Make sure you fill in the names of your resource group and cluster name: 
```azurecli-interactive
az aks nodepool list \
--resource-group <yourResourceGroupName> \ 
--cluster-name <yourAKSClusterName> \ 
--query "[].{Name:name, VMSize:vmSize}" \ 
--output table 
```

### Resizing your node pools

> After you determine the appropriate nodepool(s) to take action on, you can [**resize**](https://learn.microsoft.com/azure/aks/resize-node-pool?tabs=azure-cli) your nodepool(s) to a supported VM size.

Reviewer 3: node pool(s) -- add space

> After you determine the appropriate nodepool(s) to take action on, you can [**resize**](https://learn.microsoft.com/azure/aks/resize-node-pool?tabs=azure-cli) your nodepool(s) to a supported VM size.

Author: ```suggestion
After you determine the appropriate node pool(s) to take action on, you can [**resize**](https://learn.microsoft.com/azure/aks/resize-node-pool?tabs=azure-cli) your node pool(s) to a supported VM size.
```

When [**resizing**](https://learn.microsoft.com/azure/aks/resize-node-pool?tabs=azure-cli) a node pool, you'll go through the process of creating a new node
pool with your desired VM size while the existing node pool is cordoned, drained, and ultimately removed.

Depending on the needs of your infrastructure and workloads, when resizing your node pool, please make sure that you pick a new VM size that will best suit your needs.

> Note that these instructions are in reference to node pools. If you are using [Virtual Machines node pools](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/aks/virtual-machines-node-pools), VMs should all be generation 2 by default.

Reviewer 3: "Generation" make it capitalized

> Note that these instructions are in reference to node pools. If you are using [Virtual Machines node pools](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/aks/virtual-machines-node-pools), VMs should all be generation 2 by default.

Author: ```suggestion
Note that these instructions are in reference to node pools. If you are using [Virtual Machines node pools](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/aks/virtual-machines-node-pools), VMs should all be Generation 2 by default.
```
